---
title: "The Beginning"
date: 2018-11-16T00:00:00Z
categories: ["writing"]
tags: ["writing", "fantasy", "fiction", "nanowrimo"]
---

<p>This is the first chapter of <strong>The Shepherd King</strong>, written as part of <a href="https://nanowrimo.org/">NaNoWriMo</a>.</p>

<hr />

<p>There is a tall mountain above it, and a glacier. But there are countless mountains in Anaria. Almost everything is in a mountain, or on a mountain, or in the shadows of mountains. It is in a valley, but nearly all the dwelling places of men in that land lie in valleys of some kind or another. There is a waterfall nearby so high that on gusty days the water never reaches the ground, but even this is not so rare. And there is a vast, ancient mountain-ash that bears legions of tiny flowers. Every man that was born there and left, grasping in senile old age for the details of his native place, remembers that tree. But nobody has ever been foolish enough to search for a village based on a tree. Up the valley, beside a languid pine, in a shallow grotto, was a crude idol that figured prominently in the creation of the universe. When the elders told the children that tale, on warm summer nights when the embers calved in the firepits and the stars moved in rivers in the sky, the children believed it in the core of their souls. Several generations later, no one remembered it at all, and the savage winters of those parts are not kind to surplus goddesses. One story, though, survived those long years. Any man, any woman, any child older than four, could point to the humble house where he entered the world. At that point, though, the villages claiming to be his birthplace rivalled the mountains in number, and some of them had very official looking written documents to point to, rather than crumbling one-room huts. So the searchers, and at a certain time there were very many, never found out the truth and instead debated ceaselessly the relative merits of diverse falsehoods.</p>

<p>The truth is that he spent sixteen years in that village and in the summer of his sixteenth year an outsider came to the valley to find him. This traveller wore a brown fustian traveller’s cloak and leather sandals, and kept his gray hair shaved closely in the manner of monks and ascetics. He bore a great oaken staff, shallowly engraved with runes and topped by a small emerald ensconced in thin tendrils of wood. From a rise at the mouth of the valley he could see clearly the waterfall disappearing in midair and the glacier brighter than the sun. And yet, his eyes kept a lower angle, taking in the forest before him and the village beyond. The low wooden houses, built into hillsides with roofs conquered by wild grasses, seemed extensions of the earth. Terraces crowded the slope above the village, and stone walls marked out small plots on the valley floor. Carrying no pack, he traversed the hunting paths quickly, and by late afternoon he neared his destination. He checked his pace to reflect. To weigh words, to measure silences, to play out conversations in his head. He was not naturally a man given to circumspection, but he knew that much depended on the next few hours, the next few days.</p>

<p>The truth is that a woman showed him the village shrine, and in it he found the headman on the stone floor. The withered old man sat in silence before a wooden statue of some god, amidst meagre rural offerings: barrels of barley alcohol painted in simple hues of brown and ochre, a single small incense candle, bunches of ragworts and gentians, and several wheels of cheese. The stranger paused in the threshold to wait out the elder’s mute prayers. But because of the angle of the sun, and the traveller’s tall frame, his silhouette fell almost perfectly over the god. When the elder heard the footsteps, and perceived the shadow, he raised himself from the ground. The chief saw, in a couple moments, the oak staff, and the emerald ensconced in wood, and the runes traced in crooked columns, and knew in an instant the visitor’s identity. With an admirable composure the chief delivered the traditional greetings, and received the traditional reply. Wizards are not a common sighting in Anaria. There were only seven then, after all, and that was considered quite a lot. So this rural potentate can be forgiven for the fact that he found no ready response when the Wizard told him the purpose of his visit.</p>

<p>“There is one with magic here who is reaching the years of maturity. It is time for him or her to leave, to learn what they can do and above all what they must not.”</p>

<p>After the chief’s mouth had churned uselessly for a few moments, he could only think to ask “Here? Are you sure?” again and again.</p>

<p>But the Wizard had felt the pull for two months, ever since it came upon him while he wandered the fields of the West. Magic unharnessed, unrestricted, untamed. He was sure. Finally the headman gave him the leave he desired to search the village for the special child.</p>

<p>It took only a mark of the candle for him to realize that the one he sought was not in the village, but somewhere closeby. In the summers in those parts all the men of working age tended their flocks in the high pastures. So he prepared himself to walk the surrounding mountains until he encountered his young quarry. But this turned out to be unnecessary. When he consulted the chief as to the locations of the alpages, he told him the young man would probably be around sixteen years old, as he had been, and the Philosopher had been, and the Alchemist had been, and the Poet had been. As it turned out, there was only one of this age in the village. The chief told a shepherd returning to his post to carry a message to Kar, as he was called then, to tell him to come down off the mountain as fast as his feet could carry him.</p>

<p>The chief’s mind had worked faster in the time since the unexpected arrival. Having aided his guest and obliged him to wait in the village, the chief produced an accounting of all his rural troubles. Surely, a Wizard might resolve them as easily as a man picks a flower from its stem. There was the woman suffering from consumption, and the piece of land that no longer bore crops, and persistent harassment of a god smarting from some ancient wrong, and the couple who could not stand each other’s presence. The Wizard could not appease some deity of questionable existence, or restore wasted land, or meddle in affairs of the soul, but he willingly healed the sick peasant woman. He leaned over her and touched her forehead and his mouth moved, but if he spoke it was very soft indeed, for the villagers who pressed themselves into the doorway and and glued their ears to the opposite walls heard nothing. The woman slept for a day and a night and woke up healthy. The Wizard slept for only five hours on the rushes in the chief’s house.</p>

<p>In the end the visit of the Wizard proved a disappointing thing for those who witnessed it. No stories of distant lands, no summoning of exotic birds, no obscure prophecies. Those who saw him later conspired to recount a different story, one in which the visitor produced a feast of the most succulent meats and unobtainable spices, one in which he gave their humble persons special dispensation to drink royal wines, one in which he told the tale of his clash with the Serpent of Mjiurti, his voice building until he practically shouted the fact of the final thrust of ethereal fire that felled the beast. In truth he hardly showed himself at all from the time he healed the sick woman to the time Kar entered the village.</p>

<p>&hellip;</p>

<p>The next afternoon found the young shepherd on the ridge above the valley, tramping through wild grasses beside the trail to avoid the muddy water that gathered in its rut. He wore a simple wool tunic, gathered at the waist by a hemp string. His left hand held the leather rucksack hung over his soldier and his right an oak stave, such as shepherds often bear. The swishing of the modest provisions in his pack, the buzzing of the bugs in the grasses, and the muted roar of distant waterfalls formed the soundtrack for his methodical descent. No religions token or concession to vanity adorned his body, but yesterday he had stashed a particularly beautiful stone, smooth and elliptical and green, in his bag. The stone had skipped 12 times on a clear alpine pond near where his sheep grazed, and on a whim he had stripped off his tunic and dived into the freezing water to retrieve it, though he could barely swim.</p>

<p>The path before him now coiled into a series of sharp switchbacks down the slope, finally shaking off the little stream which had appropriated its course. Below, thin tendrils of hearth-smoke crept up from the village houses into the clear, cloudless sky. He imagined the smell of venison roasting on the spit, shaking the weariness out of his legs and urging himself onward. As he made his way down into the valley, his idle mind once again turned to curiosity. What had he been summoned for? It made little sense. There were few things in Kar’s world that operated in terms of days or marks of the candle. In these remote villages, urgency was a matter of weeks and schedules were a matter of seasons. There were things to be done when the snows were in the high passes and things to be done when they weren’t, and that was all. Outlandish possibilities bubbled up. What if the priest-chief had passed, and now it was his turn to lead the village? That would do it. He chastised himself for thinking of such an evil scenario, but once it had entered his mind it stuck there on the fringes.</p>

<p>Propelled by curiosity, hunger, and the incline of the north-east side of the valley, Kar continually increased his pace. Still, the sun was casting long shadows from the trees by the time he reached the solid forest at the bottom. The shadows had diffused entirely into the surrounding ground before he caught sight of the village again, the trail illuminated only by the ambient purple light of the sun fleeing behind the mountains of the West.</p>

<p>He expected to find his house empty, his family eating with that of his uncle’s. As he crossed the threshold, he saw instead his three younger sisters sitting on the edge of the bed, his mother mid-pace, and the Wizard-stranger sitting on the house’s sole chair. The great staff lay crosswise on his lap.</p>

<p>“Hello,” the stranger started, and hesitated just a little, “it may be better that you take this chair.”</p>

<p>And so the Wizard told Kar that he had magic, that he would need to leave to be trained, and that a good deal, perhaps even the world, now depended on his judgement and discretion. His speech ran a few minutes, and in all this time Kar had not exchanged a word with his mother.</p>

<p>“Who, exactly, are you?”</p>

<p>Kar slipped his question in as soon as a hole opened up in the Wizard’s monologue, and so he learned he had been sought out by the one they called The Traveller. He asked next for a token of magical proof, and an indecipherable mumble provoked the emerald in the staff to yield a single purple orchid bulb. But people rarely need proof to prove their conceits, and what boy or girl had not imagined themselves a magic-wielder at some point? So in a matter of moments Kar accepted his destiny, and magic consumed his identity, and a vast chasm opened up between him and the peasants who had spent a young lifetime in his presence.</p>

<p>What an embarrassing spectacle! The mother crying, the son daydreaming, the girls in sympathetic silence, guided by childish intuition. The Traveller took his leave then, fixing their departure for dawn the next day. His insensitivity is more understandable, because he had lived at that point 231 years and cannot be expected to care about the banal and subtle in the human world. But Kar should have embraced his mother, should have cried himself, should have protested his sudden displacement from the only place he had known. When finally he returned to the moment he took his mother’s hand and, under the wide eyes of his half-sisters, spoke to her in soothing tones. He would come back, he would be careful in the broad world, he would be able to provide for his sisters and their children and their children. But even these tardy words came, it seems likely, from a sense of shame and not from the sympathetic heart.</p>

<p>There is further evidence for this unflattering theory. That night he left the bed and met a girl, whose name does not matter, by the mountain-ash. In the middle of the day that imperial canopy hid its domain of black dirt and short grass from all the light of the sun, but in the middle of the night it seemed to relax its guard. The rivers of stars reached through the sleeping leaves to dapple the girl’s face, it seemed, with tiny spots of light. And next to these and between these were her freckles, tiny spots of dark. Light spot, dark spot. A difference so faint, so indistinct that the eye invented a crystalline clarity and constructed a matrix of dualism. It was an unearthly beauty, and great beauty ought to deepen sorrow and nostalgia. But Kar did not have these emotions in the first place. They made love on the ground against the tree and when they were done she started to cry. He hated her then, genuinely hated her, and he could not have told you why, but the reason that is that her crying inconvenienced him.</p>

<p>They walked back through a night that suddenly seemed cold, which before hadn’t even had a temperature. When they had walked halfway back in silence, the girl started to talk. She talked about stupid things, her friends and rumors and the size of the vegetables in Old Aella’s garden. Just before the moment came for them for them to split he took her hand silently, and she stopped talking. When the moment actually came he said “Goodbye” and she said nothing.</p>

<p>In the morning The Traveller came to the house, and Kar left with him. Much later, this part of the story, the beginning, harbored the most outlandish fabrications. Some invented auspicious or inauspicious omens, such as brilliantly colored stags or spontaneously falling trees. Many put it that his father had been a king, since he did not know his father and later he became a king himself. Some said The Traveller performed deep magic to force Kar to leave his family, or that the young shepherd made beautiful romantic gestures, like gazing at length upon his mother to memorize her face. All he really did was say farewell properly, and still the entire time his mind roamed to the most remote corners of Anaria. He pictured himself, already, in the longhalls of the lords of Mjiurti, with the blizzard winds beating like war drums against the walls, or on a palace balcony in Arfalla, watching incensed crowds course through the streets below. So he went eagerly, intoxicated by the anticipation of adventure. Some say that he felt from the beginning the gravity of his place, was solemn with the knowledge of what would be required of him. But this is not the truth.</p>
